---
title: "VMworld Session proposals"
date: 2012-05-30
---

Here is just a quick overview of the sessions I submitted for VMworld events in San Francisco and Barcelona. I've submitted three sessions in total, as my passion for resource management and Storage DRS is a public secret it should be no suprise that all sessions I participate in focus on either vSphere resource managagement or Storage DRS. :) I've split them up into two categories, vSphere centric and vCloud centric. The fourth session is the annual Ask the Expert vBloggers with the all-star crew Scott Lowe, Duncan Epping, Rick Scherer, and Chad Sakac. I hope to see you at VMworld! vSphere centric sessions Session **1545** **Architecting Storage DRS Datastore Clusters** **Abstract**: In this session Frank Denneman and Valentin Hamburger will cover and explain in great detail what to consider when building a Storage DRS datastore cluster. Introducing the concept of datastore clusters can affect or shift the paradigm of storage management in virtual infrastructures. The goal is to demonstrate the relationship between the datastore cluster and existing objects in the virtual infrastructure and how the introduction of datastore clusters can effect various design decisions. This session is a must for anyone implementing Storage DRS that wants to maximize their cluster and vSphere resource designs. Session **1683** **vSphere Cluster Resource Pools Best Practices** **Abstract:** In this session Frank Denneman and Rawlinson Rivera will cover and explain in great detail what to consider when using resource pool inside a vSphere cluster. Introducing the concept of resource pools can affect virtual machine performance and overall resource management in virtual infrastructures. Join Frank and Rawlinson and discover both common pitfalls and best practices of resource pool design. This session is a must for anyone implementing resource pools that wants to maximize their cluster and vSphere resource designs. vCloud Director centric sessions Session **1167** **vCloud tracks Architecting for vCloud Allocation Models** **Abstract:** In this session Frank Denneman and Chris Colotti will break down the three vCloud Director Allocation models in depth. Each model's settings will be shown in detail to explain the effect on vSphere resource scheduling. They will then show how Allocation models of the same type with different configurations, as well as different allocation models could live on the same Provider vDC. The goal is to demonstrate that by not only fully understanding the allocation models, but the vSphere resource allocation together you can design for multiple allocation models on a single Provider vDC. This session is a must for anyone implementing vCloud Director that wants to maximize their cluster and vCloud resource designs. Session **504** **Ask the Expert vBloggers - Scott Lowe, Duncan Epping, Rick Scherer, Frank Denneman, Chad Sakac** **Abstract:** One of the highest rated sessions at VMworld is back for it’s fifth year! Come meet four VMware Certified Design Experts (VCDX) on stage answering your questions. We get the top Virtualization Bloggers in the industry and get them on stage answering your questions in a wide array of topics. Simon at Techhead.co.uk wrote a [nice article](http://www.techhead.co.uk/vmworld-2012-session-voting-now-open) about how to vote for your favorite session at the [VMworld.com](http://www.vmworld.com/cfp.jspa) portal
