---
title: "Embarking on a new adventure - Joining PernixData as Tech Evangelist"
date: 2013-04-29
categories: 
  - "miscellaneous"
---

Sometimes something comes along that makes you feel you need to get involved with. Something that makes you want to leave the comfortable position you have now and take up the challenge of starting all over again. Help turn that something into something big. Well that something is in my case PernixData and its Flash Virtualization Platform. Joining [PernixData](http://www.pernixdata.com) means I’m leaving the great company of VMware and an awful lot of great colleague behind. Some of them I consider to be good friends. During my years at VMware I learned a lot and words cannot describe how awesome those years were. Designing the vCloud environment for the European launching partner, consulting a lot of the Fortune 500 firms, participating in VCDX panels around the world and co-authoring three books are some of the highlights during my time at VMware but I’m sure I’m forgetting a lot of other great moments. Being a part of the technical marketing team was amazing! Besides working alongside the best bloggers in the world I had the privilege to work with the engineers on a daily basis.  Having a job that allows you to think, talk and write about technology you absolutely love is great and difficult to let go. But opportunities do come along and as I mentioned in the beginning some of these opportunities spark the desire to become a part of that story. When I attended a technical preview of the Flash Virtualization Platform at PernixData I got excited. I think just as excited as when I saw my first vMotion. Meeting the founders and the team made me realize that this company and product was more than just a single product, this platform is a game changer in the world of virtual infrastructure and datacenter design. Which drove me to the decision to accept a position with PernixData as Technology Evangelist. As the Technology Evangelist I’m responsible for helping the virtualization community understand PernixData’s Flash Virtualization Platform (FVP). And as the first international employee I also will be focusing on expanding the European organization. I will be starting at PernixData soon, can’t wait to start
